CASE: pa_2024_b002
SYSTEM: CC
DISPOSITION: OVERTURN
GT: OVERTURN
CORRECT: True
ELAPSED: 342.3s
========================================================================

FINAL DISPOSITION: OVERTURN

HEALTHFIRST HEALTH PLAN
APPEALS AND GRIEVANCES DEPARTMENT
P.O. Box 9000
San Francisco, CA 94120

Date: November 8, 2024

APPEAL DETERMINATION LETTER

CASE ID: PA-2024-B002
MEMBER NAME: Thomas Reed
MEMBER ID: M-667788
AGE: 52
PLAN: HealthFirst PPO Gold — Group Plan 77441
STATE OF RESIDENCE: California
REQUESTING SURGEON: Dr. Karen Liu, MD — Spine Surgery
FACILITY: Stanford Medical Center
PROCEDURE REQUESTED: Anterior Cervical Discectomy and Fusion (ACDF) C6-C7, One Level (CPT 22551)
DATE OF INITIAL DENIAL: October 20, 2024
INITIAL REVIEWER: Dr. Patricia Huang, MD
DATE OF APPEAL RECEIPT: November 5, 2024

DISPOSITION: OVERTURNED (The prior authorization denial is reversed in full, and the requested surgical procedure is APPROVED.)

Dear Mr. Reed and Dr. Liu,

This letter serves as the formal appeal determination regarding the prior authorization request for a single-level Anterior Cervical Discectomy and Fusion (ACDF) at C6-C7 (CPT code 22551) to be performed at Stanford Medical Center by Dr. Karen Liu, MD. 

Following a comprehensive clinical and regulatory review of the initial denial issued on October 20, 2024, HealthFirst Health Plan has determined that the initial denial was based on a factual error and a misapplication of clinical criteria. The clinical record demonstrates that the member fully satisfies all medical necessity criteria under HealthFirst Clinical Coverage Criteria CC-SPINE-2024, California statutory requirements, and generally accepted standards of medical practice. Therefore, the initial denial is OVERTURNED, and the procedure is APPROVED.

I. CLINICAL HISTORY AND PRESENTING PRESENTATION
Mr. Thomas Reed is a 52-year-old male with a history of persistent, severe right-sided cervical radiculopathy.
- Clinical Exam (August 5, 2024): Documents right C7 dermatomal distribution numbness, a diminished right triceps reflex, and severe pain rated at 7/10 at rest. No bilateral findings, upper motor neuron signs, or clinical findings of myelopathy were present.
- Imaging (MRI, August 1, 2024): Demonstrates a C6-C7 disc herniation with mild cord contact without measurable compression, no cord signal change, no myelomalacia, and mild right C7 foraminal stenosis.
- Conservative Treatment History:
  1. Physical Therapy: Completed 7 weeks (total of 21 sessions) of supervised physical therapy. The physical therapy discharge summary explicitly documents that a functional plateau was reached, noting that the patient failed to improve over the final 3 sessions, and radicular symptoms remained unchanged.
  2. Pharmacotherapy: Completed a 4-month trial of Pregabalin (150mg BID) with only partial pain relief and persistent radicular symptoms, and a 3-month trial of Meloxicam (15mg) which was inadequate.
  3. Interventional Treatment: Received a right C7 epidural steroid injection on September 20, 2024, which provided 30% temporary pain relief lasting 3 weeks before symptoms returned to baseline.

II. PLAN CRITERIA ANALYSIS (CC-SPINE-2024)
Under HealthFirst Clinical Coverage Criteria CC-SPINE-2024, Section 2, authorization for cervical spinal surgery (CPT 22551) is indicated when all of the following criteria are satisfied:

1. Section 2.1 — Diagnosis Requirement: The member must have a confirmed diagnosis of cervical radiculopathy (2.1(a)) or cervical disc herniation with objective neurological deficit (2.1(c)). 
   - Clinical Alignment: Mr. Reed has a confirmed diagnosis of C6-C7 cervical radiculopathy. This is supported by objective neurological deficits on exam (right C7 dermatomal numbness and diminished right triceps reflex) and correlating MRI findings (C6-C7 disc herniation and right C7 foraminal stenosis). This fully satisfies Section 2.1(a) and 2.1(c).

2. Section 2.2 — Conservative Treatment Requirement:
   - Section 2.2(a) Physical Therapy: Requires a minimum of 6 weeks of supervised physical therapy with documented functional outcomes. Mr. Reed completed 7 weeks (21 sessions) of supervised physical therapy, satisfying the duration requirement. The PT discharge summary explicitly documents that a functional plateau was reached.
   - Section 2.2(b) Pharmacotherapy: Requires a trial of at least two specified agents for a minimum of 4 weeks each. Mr. Reed completed a 4-month trial of Pregabalin (neuropathic agent) and a 3-month trial of Meloxicam (NSAID), fully satisfying this requirement.
   - Section 2.2(c) Interventional Treatment: Requires at least one cervical epidural steroid injection, medial branch block, or trigger point injection series. Mr. Reed completed a right C7 epidural steroid injection on September 20, 2024, fully satisfying this requirement.

3. Section 2.3 — Imaging Requirement: Requires current imaging (within 6 months) demonstrating structural pathology consistent with symptoms. The MRI dated August 1, 2024, demonstrates a C6-C7 disc herniation and right C7 foraminal stenosis, which directly correlates with the patient's right C7 radicular symptoms and diminished triceps reflex.

4. Section 2.4 — Physician Documentation: Dr. Liu has provided the necessary clinical rationale, description of functional limitations, and statement of surgical risks.

Based on the above, the member fully satisfies all medical necessity criteria outlined in CC-SPINE-2024.

III. ANALYSIS OF INITIAL DENIAL AND FACTUAL ERRORS
The initial denial issued on October 20, 2024, cited two primary reasons for denial:
1. "PT not yet completed to functional plateau."
2. "Imaging shows C6-C7 disc herniation with mild cord contact but no measurable compression. No myelopathy findings on exam."

Both findings are clinically and factually incorrect:
- Factual Error regarding Physical Therapy: The denial reviewer, Dr. Patricia Huang, MD, asserted that physical therapy was not completed to a functional plateau. This is directly contradicted by the physical therapy discharge summary, which explicitly states that a functional plateau was reached and that the patient did not improve over the final 3 sessions.
- Misapplication of Diagnostic Criteria: The reviewer denied the request because there was "no measurable compression" and "no myelopathy findings on exam." However, the requested procedure is for the treatment of cervical radiculopathy (Section 2.1(a)), not cervical myelopathy (Section 2.1(b)). Under Section 2.1(a), the presence of nerve root compression with correlating radicular symptoms is sufficient. The patient's MRI demonstrates right C7 foraminal stenosis, and the clinical exam demonstrates correlating C7 dermatomal numbness and reflex changes. Requiring cord compression or myelopathy findings for a radiculopathy patient is a clinical category error and a misapplication of the plan's own criteria.

IV. CALIFORNIA REGULATORY COMPLIANCE ANALYSIS
Because the member is a resident of California and enrolled in a California health plan, the determination must comply with California statutory and regulatory frameworks.

1. California Insurance Code (CIC) § 10169.5 — Physical Therapy as a Prerequisite:
   - Under CIC § 10169.5(a)(2), a health plan shall not condition approval of a surgical procedure on the completion of physical therapy where the member has completed a course of physical therapy and the treating physician documents that the member reached a functional plateau without adequate resolution of symptoms.
   - Under CIC § 10169.5(c), a plan's internal requirement for physical therapy shall not be applied mechanically without reference to whether the member has achieved a functional plateau.
   - Application: The plan's initial denial mechanically rejected the physical therapy trial despite explicit documentation of a functional plateau in the PT discharge summary. This mechanical denial directly violates CIC § 10169.5.

2. California Health & Safety Code (CHSC) § 1374.32 — Standard of Review for Independent Medical Review (IMR):
   - Under CHSC § 1374.32(b), the medical necessity standard does not require that a service be consistent with the plan's internal coverage criteria if the service is in accordance with generally accepted standards of medical practice and is clinically appropriate.
   - Under CHSC § 1374.32(c), the plan's internal medical necessity criteria shall not be the sole or determinative basis for a decision if they are more restrictive than generally accepted standards.
   - Application: To the extent that the plan's initial reviewer interpreted "mild cord contact" as failing to meet an imaging threshold, such an interpretation is more restrictive than generally accepted standards of medical practice for symptomatic radiculopathy and is overridden by California law.

V. CLINICAL EVIDENCE AND GUIDELINES ALIGNMENT
Generally accepted standards of medical practice strongly support surgical intervention in this case:
1. AANS/CNS Joint Section on Disorders of the Spine Guidelines (2023 Update): Under these guidelines, Mr. Reed meets Tier 2 "Reasonable Indication" for surgical decompression (ACDF). Surgery is recommended for patients with cervical radiculopathy who have persistent, severe symptoms (pain 7/10) and objective neurological deficits (diminished reflex, numbness) that have failed to respond to an adequate course of conservative treatment (exceeding 6-12 weeks).
2. North American Spine Society (NASS) Evidence-Based Clinical Guidelines (2020): Support surgical intervention for cervical radiculopathy when there is clear symptom-imaging correlation and conservative measures (including physical therapy, neuropathic medications, and epidural steroid injections) have failed to provide lasting relief.
3. Clinical Definition of Functional Plateau: As defined in clinical standards (Section 5 of the Clinical Reference Summary), a functional plateau is reached when there is a failure to achieve meaningful functional improvement over consecutive therapy sessions. The physical therapist's documentation of no improvement over the final 3 sessions of a 21-session course satisfies this clinical definition.

VI. FINAL DETERMINATION AND AUTHORIZATION DETAILS
The prior authorization denial is OVERTURNED. The requested single-level Anterior Cervical Discectomy and Fusion (ACDF) at C6-C7 is approved.

- Approved Procedure: ACDF C6-C7, one level (CPT 22551)
- Requesting Provider: Dr. Karen Liu, MD — Spine Surgery
- Facility: Stanford Medical Center
- Authorization Reference Number: AUTH-PA-2024-B002
- Effective Date: November 8, 2024
- Expiration Date: February 6, 2025 (90 days from approval per CC-SPINE-2024 Section 3.5)

If you have any questions regarding this determination, please contact the Appeals and Grievances Department at 1-800-555-0199.

Sincerely,

Medical Director, Appeals and Grievances
HealthFirst Health Plan

*** DECISION METADATA ***
{
  "case_id": "PA-2024-B002",
  "disposition": "OVERTURN",
  "member_id": "M-667788",
  "procedure_code": "22551",
  "state": "California",
  "reviewer_factual_error": true,
  "criteria_misapplied": true
}