CASE: pa_2024_e003
SYSTEM: CC
DISPOSITION: OVERTURN
GT: OVERTURN
CORRECT: True
ELAPSED: 518.3s
========================================================================

FINAL DISPOSITION: OVERTURN

HEALTHFIRST HEALTH PLAN
APPEALS AND GRIEVANCES DEPARTMENT
P.O. Box 45000
San Francisco, CA 94145

Date: November 18, 2024

APPEAL DETERMINATION LETTER

MEMBER NAME: George Harris
MEMBER ID: M-889922
CASE ID: PA-2024-E003
PLAN: HealthFirst PPO Gold — Group Plan 77441
STATE OF RESIDENCE: California
REQUESTING PROVIDER: Dr. Karen Williams, MD — Revision Spine Surgery
FACILITY: UCSF Medical Center
PROCEDURE REQUESTED: Revision Anterior Cervical Discectomy and Fusion (ACDF) C5-C6 (CPT 22551)
INITIAL DENIAL DATE: October 30, 2024
INITIAL REVIEWER: Dr. Patricia Huang, MD
APPEAL DATE: November 14, 2024

FINAL APPEAL DETERMINATION: OVERTURN

Dear Mr. Harris and Dr. Williams,

The HealthFirst Health Plan Appeals and Grievances Department has completed its review of the first-level internal appeal for the requested Revision Anterior Cervical Discectomy and Fusion (ACDF) C5-C6 (CPT 22551). After a comprehensive clinical and regulatory review of the submitted medical records, plan coverage criteria, and California statutory requirements, HealthFirst has determined that the initial prior authorization denial issued on October 30, 2024, is OVERTURNED. The requested procedure is APPROVED.

I. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
The initial prior authorization request was denied on October 30, 2024, on the grounds that "Revision surgery is not covered under standard ACDF criteria... Documentation submitted does not confirm hardware failure."

Upon appeal review, we find that the initial denial was factually and procedurally incorrect. While the initial reviewer relied on an inconclusive MRI (dated September 1, 2024) that was severely limited by hardware artifact, they failed to consider a concurrent high-resolution CT scan (dated September 15, 2024) that explicitly confirmed pseudarthrosis (failed fusion) at C5-C6. Under the plan's clinical coverage criteria (CC-SPINE-2024), pseudarthrosis is an authorized indication for revision surgery.

Furthermore, the patient has fully satisfied all standard conservative treatment requirements under Section 2.2 of the plan's criteria, including 8 weeks of supervised physical therapy, multiple pharmacotherapy trials, and a cervical epidural steroid injection. Although the plan's clinical criteria under Section 2.1 literally require an "MRI or CT myelogram" within 6 months, California Health & Safety Code (CHSC) § 1374.32 mandates that clinical standards of medical necessity override restrictive plan criteria. Generally accepted clinical standards establish that a standard CT scan is the clinically superior and accepted modality for assessing fusion status in the presence of hardware artifact. Accordingly, the denial is overturned, and the procedure is authorized.

II. CLINICAL HISTORY AND EVIDENCE REVIEWED
The patient is a 48-year-old male with a history of a prior C5-C6 ACDF performed in 2021. He initially experienced a good outcome, but symptoms of right C6 radiculopathy recurred approximately 18 months postoperatively and have progressively worsened.

The following clinical evidence was submitted and reviewed:
1. MRI of the Cervical Spine (September 1, 2024): Demonstrates significant hardware artifact that limits the assessment of the C5-C6 level. The radiologist noted "possible non-union at C5-C6 but cannot confirm" and that "residual disc material or recurrent herniation cannot be excluded."
2. CT Scan of the Cervical Spine (September 15, 2024): Performed without artifact limitation. Findings reveal "incomplete bridging bone formation" and "lucency around hardware suggesting pseudarthrosis" at C5-C6. The findings are diagnostic of failed fusion/pseudarthrosis. The hardware itself appears intact without fracture.
3. Neurological Examination (September 20, 2024): Documented by Dr. Karen Williams, MD. Reveals a return of right C6 radicular symptoms, including bicep weakness (4/5), a diminished right bicep reflex, and C6 dermatomal numbness. The patient's clinical presentation is worse than his preoperative baseline.
4. Conservative Treatment Records:
   - Physical Therapy: Completed 8 weeks (24 sessions) of supervised physical therapy. The physical therapist and treating physician documented no functional improvement, noting that physical therapy cannot address structural hardware/fusion failure.
   - Pharmacotherapy: Completed a 4-month trial of Naproxen 500mg BID (NSAID) and a 3-month trial of Gabapentin 300mg TID (neuropathic agent), both yielding only partial and inadequate pain relief.
   - Interventional Treatment: Received a cervical epidural steroid injection on October 10, 2024, which resulted in minimal and transient improvement.

III. ANALYSIS OF PLAN CRITERIA (CC-SPINE-2024)
To qualify for cervical spinal surgery under HealthFirst Clinical Coverage Criteria CC-SPINE-2024, a member must satisfy the requirements of Section 2.

1. Section 2.1: Diagnosis Requirement
The patient has a primary diagnosis of cervical radiculopathy, characterized by nerve root compression with radicular symptoms (right bicep weakness, diminished reflex, and dermatomal numbness). This satisfies the diagnostic category under Section 2.1(a).

We explicitly acknowledge that the patient's primary diagnosis is radiculopathy, not myelopathy. Therefore, the myelopathy exceptions under CC-SPINE-2024 Section 2.2(a) and California Department of Managed Health Care (DMHC) All-Plan Letter APL 22-014 do not apply to this case. The patient's request must be evaluated under the standard radiculopathy pathway.

2. Section 2.2: Conservative Treatment Requirement
Under the standard radiculopathy pathway, the member must complete a documented course of conservative treatment consisting of physical therapy, pharmacotherapy, and an interventional treatment. The patient has fully satisfied these requirements:
   - Section 2.2(a) (Physical Therapy): The patient completed 8 weeks of supervised physical therapy (exceeding the 6-week minimum).
   - Section 2.2(b) (Pharmacotherapy): The patient completed trials of two qualifying agents for at least 4 weeks each (Naproxen for 4 months and Gabapentin for 3 months).
   - Section 2.2(c) (Interventional): The patient received a cervical epidural steroid injection on October 10, 2024 (satisfying the minimum of 1 injection).
Because the patient has fully satisfied the standard conservative treatment requirements, the clinical criteria under Section 2.2 are met in full, making any myelopathy-related conservative treatment waivers or modifications irrelevant.

3. Section 2.1 & 2.3: Imaging Requirement and Technical Non-Compliance
Section 2.1 of CC-SPINE-2024 states that supporting documentation must include an "MRI or CT myelogram within 6 months of request."
The patient's MRI (September 1, 2024) was inconclusive due to hardware artifact. The patient's diagnostic imaging confirming pseudarthrosis is a standard CT scan (September 15, 2024), which is not a CT myelogram.
We explicitly acknowledge that a standard CT scan does not strictly conform to the literal text of Section 2.1, which specifies only "MRI or CT myelogram." Under a rigid, literal application of the plan's filed criteria, the standard CT scan would be considered non-conforming.

However, as detailed below, California regulatory requirements and generally accepted clinical standards of medical practice prohibit the mechanical application of this restrictive imaging requirement to deny medically necessary care.

IV. CALIFORNIA REGULATORY FRAMEWORK AND CLINICAL STANDARDS
1. Clinical Superiority of CT Scan for Pseudarthrosis (AANS/CNS & NASS Guidelines)
Generally accepted clinical standards, including the AANS/CNS Joint Section Guidelines (2023) and the North American Spine Society (NASS) Evidence-Based Clinical Guidelines (2020), establish that standard CT scanning is the gold standard and clinically superior modality for assessing bony fusion and pseudarthrosis in patients with existing spinal hardware.
MRI is highly susceptible to magnetic susceptibility artifact (metal artifact) from titanium or stainless steel hardware, which obscures the bone-hardware interface and makes the assessment of bridging bone impossible. A CT myelogram is an invasive procedure involving an intrathecal injection of contrast, which carries risks of headache, infection, and spinal fluid leak. Requiring an invasive CT myelogram solely to document bony fusion when a non-invasive, high-resolution standard CT scan has already clearly and safely demonstrated pseudarthrosis is clinically inappropriate and contrary to the standard of care.

2. California Health & Safety Code § 1374.32 (Clinical Standards Override)
Under California Health & Safety Code (CHSC) § 1374.32(a), "medically necessary" services are defined as those that a physician, exercising prudent clinical judgment, would provide to treat an illness or injury in accordance with generally accepted standards of medical practice and that are clinically appropriate.
Crucially, CHSC § 1374.32(b) mandates that the Independent Medical Review (IMR) standard does NOT require that a service be consistent with the plan's internal coverage criteria. If the service meets generally accepted clinical standards, it must be approved, and the plan's internal criteria "shall not be the sole or determinative basis" for a decision (CHSC § 1374.32(c)).
Because generally accepted clinical standards recognize a standard CT scan as the appropriate and superior modality for diagnosing pseudarthrosis in the presence of hardware, HealthFirst is legally and clinically obligated under California law to accept the CT scan findings. Relying on the literal omission of "standard CT scan" in Section 2.1 to deny coverage would represent an unauthorized and legally indefensible deviation from California's medical necessity mandate.

3. California Insurance Code § 10169.5 (Physical Therapy and Functional Plateau)
Under CIC § 10169.5(a)(2), a health plan cannot condition approval of a surgical procedure on the completion of physical therapy if the member has completed a course of therapy and the treating physician documents that the member reached a functional plateau.
The patient completed 8 weeks of physical therapy and reached a functional plateau, as documented by Dr. Williams, because physical therapy cannot address the underlying structural failure of the prior fusion (pseudarthrosis). This statutory provision further reinforces that the patient's conservative treatment has been fully and legally exhausted.

V. CONCLUSION
The clinical documentation establishes that Mr. Harris has symptomatic, CT-confirmed C5-C6 pseudarthrosis with progressive right C6 radiculopathy that has failed to respond to a complete and legally compliant course of conservative treatment.

While the standard CT scan represents a technical non-compliance with the literal imaging modalities listed in CC-SPINE-2024 Section 2.1, California law (CHSC § 1374.32) dictates that generally accepted clinical standards govern. Because a standard CT scan is the clinically superior and accepted standard of care for assessing pseudarthrosis in the presence of hardware, its diagnostic findings are accepted as contractually and legally sufficient.

Accordingly, the initial prior authorization denial is OVERTURNED. The request for Revision ACDF C5-C6 (CPT 22551) is APPROVED.

Authorization Details:
- Approved Procedure: Revision ACDF C5-C6 (CPT 22551)
- Facility: UCSF Medical Center
- Requesting Provider: Dr. Karen Williams, MD
- Authorization Period: Valid for 90 days from the date of this letter (expires February 16, 2025) per CC-SPINE-2024 Section 3.5.

Sincerely,

Appeals and Grievances Clinical Reviewer
HealthFirst Health Plan

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
METADATA FOOTER:
{"case_id": "PA-2024-E003", "disposition": "OVERTURN", "clinical_category": "radiculopathy_primary", "plan_criteria_met": "PARTIAL_TECHNICAL_NON_COMPLIANCE_OVERRIDDEN_BY_REGULATION", "conservative_treatment_satisfied": true, "imaging_conformance": "NON_CONFORMING_TECHNICAL_BUT_CLINICALLY_SUPERIOR", "regulatory_override_applied": true, "regulatory_citations": ["CHSC § 1374.32", "CIC § 10169.5"], "clinical_guideline_citations": ["AANS/CNS Joint Section Guidelines (2023)", "NASS Evidence-Based Clinical Guidelines (2020)"]}